---
title: "An introduction and a welcome"
layout: post
date: 2016-03-11 02:32
tag:
- first
- intro
projects: true
star: true
---
> There is nothing to writing. All you do is sit down at a typewriter and bleed.
>
> -- <cite>Ernest Hemingway</cite>

<p align="justify">
Hey there!
</p>
<p align="justify">I'm <a href='http://barisekim.me/about'>Barış</a>, and this is my personal site - a collection of thoughts on various topics, things I
find interesting, and some of my own work.</p>

<p align="justify">I've always thought that the idea of starting a blog is kind of repulsive. When I started being surrounded by a myriad of personal sites both on and off the Internet, I chose not to based on the faulty reasoning that I simply had "nothing to say". In hindsight, I believe I had not discovered what I have to say at that time.</p>

<p align="justify">Ultimately, writing is communication. It is through writing that one is able to both permanently store and compel attention to personal thoughts. I believe that the blogging process will force me to stop, think twice, and delve deep into issues that I had already spent time thinking about. I hope that through this clumsy attempt, I will take a step at thinking more intentionally about who I am becoming, the things that I stand for, and the thoughts that shape my life. In the process, I also hope to reach to people that I am having trouble conveying my opinions to in a more organized and eloquent way. I believe this is just enough motivation to get started. </p>

<p align="justify">I tend to digress a lot, so this blog will likely be a mess of posts whose topics may range from mathematics to computer science to philosophy. Hopefully I'll be able to establish links in between in order to give a more complete picture of who I am and what I usually spend time thinking about every day.</p>

<p align="justify">I hope you enjoy visiting my blog! Please do not hesitate to leave comments below or <a href='mailto:baris@sigmaturkey.org'>contact me</a>.
