---
title: "Meta rant on numbers"
layout: post
date: 2016-04-18 04:31
tag:
- rant
- math
- life
blog: true
star: false
---

<script type="text/javascript">
  window.MathJax = {
    tex2jax: {
      inlineMath: [ ['$','$'], ["\\(","\\)"] ],
      processEscapes: true
    }
  };
</script>

<script type="text/javascript"
   src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML">
</script>

<p align="justify">
<i>I never completely enjoyed the meals I had by myself – always sort of cold, or
incomplete.</i>

<p align="justify"> Turkish-Persian thinker Rumi said: “Loneliness is to God; all
beings seek a wife.” Indeed, we need two arms to hug, two hearts to love. To define
something, we use the opposite of it – for it is its complementary, its reason to be. Like night
and day, black and white, good and evil. Can the Sun and the Moon be thought of separately? </p>

<p align="justify"> I’ve always thought of odd numbers as defying this concept. They appear as outliers to
this orderly way of living, unable to create or relate to a balancing and pacifying duality in the
universe. Our efforts in creating something balanced out of odd numbers results in smaller
pieces that are even more complex to work with.</p>

<p align="justify">Maybe that’s why we use them very frequently – in order to give some meaning to
them, to show that we care, as part of our human conscience. We say, “Would you excuse us
a minute?” for example. A hat trick, three goals, is something to be proud of in the sport of
soccer. We ask ourselves “What would be the three things I would take with me to a deserted
island?” There is only one winner, and sometime we desire to win so desperately, we say, “If
only I had one more chance” – we would do anything to have that.
To get into our dream school, we write single-spaced, one-page essays.
As resilient and sturdy as the number “1” appears, it is also somewhat somber. “2” is
tender-minded, sincere, and loving – that’s why we crown the “first”. All this meaning put
onto the odd numbers is because we try to diminish their solitude, secludedness, and isolation
– to conceal them.</p>
<p align="justify">
Because we can’t stand being the “odd number” in our lives. We can’t go have fun in a
couples-only club by ourselves. When the music starts playing we ask our partner to dance.
“Are you crazy?” we say, “who would go there alone?” We find, or become, a fellow traveller
to embark on an adventure. When a baby enters our lives and brings us happiness and joy, we
say “He should have a sibling”, so he is not alone.
</p>
<p align="justify">
We are afraid to be alone, to be “odd” – and we assume that odd numbers are like us.
That’s why we don’t want them to be sad. The loneliest pieces on the chessboard are the king
and the queen, desperately suppressing a pitiful solitude under their noble appearance. The
most cheerful ones, the pawns, chirp around everywhere. The rooks, bishops, and the knights
always have their one eye on their counterparts – they always have each other’s back. When
one loses the other, it grieves – because it’s alone.
</p>
<p align="justify">
Odd numbers deny to be divided because they define integrity – they are bigger than
boundaries. They have the ability to organize and unite. Even numbers can be divided, and the
pieces left lack unity and integrity, which creates create chaos and complexity. Odd numbers
are perfect because they are above duality, and even numbers, which are human.
</p>
<p align="justify">
I had a way with numbers ever since I could remember. Even numbers accompany me with their cheerfulness and
warm nature – they scurry around in the curves of my brain like mischievous, noisy kids. But
odd numbers are timid, tender, and sensitive. Although they try to appear strong, I sometimes
found them somewhere, gloomy and lonely. Sometimes they leave a piece of their own when
divided – it hurts me. That’s why I like them all the better – because no one deserves to be
alone.
</p>
<p align="justify">
Complete and utter nonsense? Leave a comment. Until next time!
</p>


